# Symmetric Bicone [^f1]
In this subsection we discuss the symmetric bicone evolution.


The symmetric bicone antenna design was the most basic bicone evolution
conducted. A notable contributor to this project was Alex Machtay. 
An individual in this case is fully defined by three genes (parameters): 
* the inner radius (r)
* the length (L), and
* the opening angle ($\theta$)

as seen in {numref}`fig_BiconeDrawing`.
Because this run is symmetric, each of these values is used to make the top and
bottom cones. A single individual in the GA is an antenna design given by these
three parameters. 

```{figure} img/SymmetricBicone.png
---
name: fig_BiconeDrawing
width: 40%
---
Geometry of bicone antenna showing the genes of length (l), opening angle theta
($\theta$), and minor radius (r). The separation distance (s) is held constant.
```

## The Symmetric Bicone Loop

The Symmetric Bicone Loop follows the procedure described in
{ref}`GENETISGA`. The first generation is initialized by selecting
values for the three genes for each individual from a uniform distribution with
a mean at the gene values for the current ARA designs. The parameters for the
initialization can be seen in {numref}`tab:initialization` below. 

```{list-table} Range of uniform distributions used for each gene
:header-rows: 1
:name: tab:initialization
* - Gene
  - Minimum
  - Maximum
* - Length (cm)
  - 37.5
  - 140
* - Radius (cm)
  - 0.0
  - 7.5
* - Opening Angle (degrees)
  - 0.0
  - 11.3
```

Instead of a hard-coded restriction on the diameter, this GA penalizes the
fitness score of individuals with an outer radius larger than the borehole
size. 

::::{admonition} More on the fitness score calculation
:class: dropdown, tip
As seen below, the penalty was implemented by making the fitness score a
piecewise function, where $R_{\rm max} = 7.5\,\rm cm$.

```{math}
\rm Fitness \ Score= \left\{
        \begin{array}{ll}
            V_{\rm eff}\, 
            e^{-(R_{\rm max}-R)^2} \quad& {\rm if} \ R > R_{\rm max} \\
            V_{\rm eff} & {\rm if}\  R\leq R_{\rm max} \\
        \end{array}
    \right.
```

If the outer radius were smaller than the radius of the borehole, the fitness
score would be equal to the effective volume produced by AraSim. However, if
the outer radius were larger than the radius of the borehole, then the fitness
score would be penalized by multiplying the effective volume by an
exponentially decreasing function, which would lower the fitness score relative
to the amount the radius exceeds the borehole size. This ensured that potential
solutions would become much less dense in the region of the parameter space
where the value for this gene was large. 
::::


Once the fitness scores were calculated, the GA selected parents and children
in a two-step process. The first step uses roulette selection, whereby pairs of
individuals are selected as parents. Genes for the children are randomly
selected using uniform crossover to create two offspring. Once genes for the
children were selected, they went through a second step before the evolution
continued. The second step improved genetic diversity by introducing mutations
to $60$% of the offspring generated in the first step. This was done by
modifying the values of each gene by a small perturbation drawn from a Gaussian
distribution. 

## Symmetric Bicone Results

No significant evolution.

::::{admonition} More on why
:class: dropdown, tip
```{figure} img/Violin_Plot_sym_go.png
---
name: fig:SymmetricViolin
---
Initial results for the evolution of the symmetric bicone. The current ARA
bicone fitness is shown as the horizontal dotted line. The width of the line
represents the probability density of the population. The solid red line shows
the population's mean, and the dashed green line shows the population's median.
This figure illustrates that although the loop was functioning correctly, the
solution was not evolving over generations (Figure by Alex Machtay).
```

The simulation involved 50 individuals over 11 generations, simulating 30k
neutrinos per individual, and the results are presented in the violin plot in
{numref}`fig:SymmetricViolin`.
There are a few potential reasons for this occurring.
+ First, the solution could already be optimized without much room for
  improvement, as the geometry does not allow for more diversity than ARA's
  design.
+ Second, the GA may not be adequately searching the parameter space, as it was
  not further optimized. A non-optimized GA evolves less efficiently, causing
  the use of excess generations prior to showing improvements.
::::


The GENETIS team consequently decided to improve the GA further in the next
iteration of the loop, as discussed in the [asymmetric bicone section](sec:asym).

---

&#9986;
.
.
.
&#9986; [^f2]


[^f1]: Rolla, Julie. Dissertation Chapter 3 Section 3.4.1
        *The Symmetric Bicone Evolution*
[^f2]: Rolla, Julie. Dissertation Chapter 3 Section 3.4.1.2
        *Symmetric Bicone Results* (second half)
