# Discussion: the Loop [^f1]


## Overview

This section is a general discussion on any
{term}`GENETIS "Loop" <Loop /'lüp/>`,
which begins by creating an initial population of "individuals".

:::{glossary}
Individual
  A potential solution (eg. an antenna) to the problem at hand
  (eg. antenna optimization).
  An individual is characterized by a set of {term}`genes`.

Genes
  Parameters that describe an {term}`individual`
  (eg. length, radius, separation distance).
:::

These individuals are then tested and assigned "fitness scores".
For an {term}`individual`, we evaluate its fitness by first simulating its
response pattern ("gain pattern") using {ref}`XFdtd <a2xfdtd>`.
We then put the individual into a model ARA detector using the Askaryan Radio
Array simulation software {term}`AraSim`.
With the individual inside, the simulated detector's sensitivity is then
evaluated and used to determine the individual's fitness.

:::{glossary}
AraSim
  A Monte Carlo simulation software that simulates the in-ice environment
  for ARA.

Selection Methods
  TBA

Operators
  TBA
:::

```{admonition} TODO
:class: dropdown
    glossary above
```

Once the performance of an entire generation of individuals are assessed through
AraSim, we select the best performing individuals via {term}`selection methods`
and {term}`operators` to generate the next generation of individuals, much like
the process of natural selection.

```{figure} img/GALoop.png
---
height: 150px
name: galoop
---
```

In the remainder of this section, we will go over the details of each step in
the loop, corresponding to the {doc}`reference guide <../guide/A3/A3>`.

% ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

(ch3-3-1)=
## Initialization

```{admonition} TODO
:class: dropdown
    Ask Julie what the difference between the two is.
```

For the zeroth-generation {term}`individual`, each of its
{term}`genes` is selected either

1. from a uniform distribution between a set maximum and minimum value, or
2. at random within a maximum or minimum value;

Each individual is forced to follow certain constraints.
For instance, a main constraint prevents the antenna from being too
large to fit in the ARA boreholes (25 cm).

:::{note}
While not specified in the GA, a borehole clearance of 1.1 cm for the
vertically polarized (VPol) antennas and 2.3 cm for the horizontally
polarized (HPol) antennas is utilized by ARA.
Future experiments may utilize larger boreholes (over 28 cm in diameter)
which would improve the design sensitivity.
:::

Another constraint is the minimum length of a design due to the limitations of
the simulation software. Simulations of antenna gains become unreliable when the
frequencies being simulated are outside of the antenna's bandwidth.

Treating each half of the bicone as a quarter-wave dipole, the minimum length of
the antenna is found using: $L = \frac{c}{4f}$ where $L$ is
the length, $c$ is the speed of light in a vacuum, and $f$
is the minimum frequency. As power for Askaryan radiation is linear with
frequency, low power galactic noise dominates Askaryan radiation below 100 MHz.
A minimum frequency of approximately 100 MHz gives a full length of 75 cm (each
side 37.5 cm), which is defined as the minimum length allowed by the algorithm.
The higher frequencies we are testing could have a smaller length (7.5 cm at
1000 MHz), but these would not be valid at the lower frequency ranges.

```{admonition} TODO
:class: dropdown
    The paragraph above should be moved to the genetic algorithm reference
    guide because it contains too much detail.
```

% ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

(ch3-3-2)=

## Fitness evaluation

Once every individual in a generation is defined, the fitness score of each
individual must be determined.
To do so, we

1. simulated each individual's gain pattern, then
2. determine the effectiveness of the simulated ARA detector which contains the
   simulated individual.

An effective detector should be more sensitive to neutrino radio signals.

```{admonition} TODO
:class: dropdown
    gain pattern glossary
```

(ch3-3:xfdtd)=
### gain pattern simulation with XFdtd

XFdtd is a computational electromagnetism simulation software developed by
REMCOM that utilizes the finite difference time domain method (FDTD) to compute
antenna responses. During the XFdtd simulation, each individual is hit by bursts
of artificial radiation, and its gain pattern is computed.

```{admonition} more on FDTD
:class: tip, dropdown

XFdtd performs simulations by solving Maxwell's equations in the time
domain. In this approach, the geometry of the device and the surrounding
space are divided into small discrete cubic segments, or *cells*, that
have associated field lines in each direction.

The size of the cells must be small compared to the wavelength of the EM
waves. The simulation takes small steps forward in time, with the step size
based on the time it takes for a field to travel between each cell.
For each step in time the electric fields are calculated, and then the
magnetic fields.

Since every cell in the simulation space is directly adjacent to others, the
fields from one cell will impact the surrounding cells in each subsequent
time step. Each cell is assigned a material property and the appropriate
boundary conditions. Excitation conditions, like a pulse or constant EM
wave, allow for the response of the provided geometries to be tested.
The calculations continue until a steady-state position is reached.
```

For each antenna, we compute its response to radiation from all directions, that
is, the full range of polar angle $\theta$ from 0 to 180 degrees and
azimuthal $\phi$ from 0 to 360 degrees (both in 5-degree steps). This
all-direction simulation is done for one *single* frequency, and the process is
repeated for all frequencies in a given range (say, from a list of 60
frequencies from 83.33 MHz - 1.066 GHz in equal steps). The results are in the
form of gain (dBi) for a range of frequencies in all directions.

:::{note}
The AREA project does not use XFdtd, as the goal is to evolve gain patterns
directly (instead of antennas).
:::

### effective volume simulation with AraSim

Developed by the ARA collaboration, AraSim is a Monte Carlo neutrino detection
simulator that is able to model neutrinos with energies between
$E_\nu = 10^{17}$ to $10^{21}$ eV. AraSim simulates high-energy
neutrino interactions in the Antarctic ice, which produce electromagnetic
showers resulting in the production of Askaryan radiation.

```{admonition}  more on AraSim
:class: tip, dropdown

AraSim uniformly distributes the neutrino-ice interactions within a
cylindrical volume with a 3 km radius centered around the detector.
The direction of the incoming neutrino is randomly distributed over a solid
angle of $4 \pi$.

The radio emission propagation is modeled using ray tracing, which
determines the path length from the interaction to the detector. The ray
tracing models the depth-dependent index of refraction of the ice, which is
$n=1.3$ at the surface to $n=1.8$ at 200m depth. Because of
this variable index of refraction, the electromagnetic waves emitted from
the interaction bend en route from the interaction point to the antenna.

AraSim then calculates the polarization, viewing angle, travel time at the
receivers, and then models the system electronics, noise waveforms, and
time-domain trigger. The output of AraSim is a file that contains the same
data in the same format (as well as additional information) as an actual ARA
event, including the event waveforms.
```

After XFdtd produces an individual's gain pattern, we use it in AraSim to
calculate the **effective volume**, which serves as the fitness score of the
individual.

```{admonition} TODO
:class: dropdown
    effective volume glossary here
```

Since the number of expected neutrinos detected is directly proportional to
effective volume, we can directly use this value as the fitness score.

````{admonition} more on effective volume
:class: tip, dropdown

The effective volume ($[V \Omega]_{\rm eff}$) quantifies the volume of
ice and solid angle of the sky the detector can detect signals within, as
well as the trigger efficiencies and interaction cross-sections. This is
determined in AraSim by measuring the fraction of simulated events detected
by the array and multiplying by the simulated ice volume and solid angle.
The effective volume is given below.

(_ch3_3_Veff_eqn)=
```{math}
    [V\Omega]_{\rm eff} =
    4\pi \ V_{\rm ice} \ \frac{N_{\rm detected}}{N_{\rm {simulated} }}
```

Where $V_{\rm ice}$ is the total volume of ice simulated in AraSim,
$N_{\rm detected}$ is the total number of neutrinos detected
(accounting for trigger efficiencies and interaction cross-sections), and
$N_{\rm sim}$ is the total number of neutrinos simulated.  In
this analysis, $V_{\rm ice}$ is given by a cylinder around the
detector with a radius of 3 km, with a total volume of approximately 
85 km{sup}`3`.  For each individual, $N_{\rm simulated}$ is
$3\times10^{5}$ neutrinos with an energy of $10^{18}$ eV.
Simulating this number of neutrinos gives a standard deviation of 
0.11 km{sup}`3` str.

````

% ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

(ch3-3-3)=

## New Generation Creation

```{admonition} TODO
:class: dropdown
    GA, parents, operators glossary, or maybe just reference a discussion on
    what GA is.
```

GAs use various selection methods to decide which parents and operators will
generate the offspring to create a new generation. First, selection methods are
used to choose all of the parents needed to make the next generation. Second,
each individual in the new generation is created using genetic operators. The
selection methods and operators used by GENETIS have grown more diverse as our
software has grown.

% More details on the types of selection methods and operators used in our runs

% will be discussed in the following section on each project.

% ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

(ch3-3-4)=

## Iteration and Termination

Our program continues to iterate and consequently evolve individuals toward more
optimal solutions (hence the term {ref}`"Loop" <a3idx>`).
In the same fashion as the first generation, fitness scores are found for each
iteration (Generation), and new generations are built from the prior.
The selection methods and genetic operators work together to cause evolution
toward parameters more optimal for neutrino detection.
The loop is terminated when either a preset number of generations is completed,
a set fitness score is found, or the fitness score has plateaued.

% ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

(ch3-3-5)=

## Computation Time

One potential challenge in machine learning and evolutionary algorithms is slow
computation times. This challenge is one GENETIS has continuously been working
toward improving. Since each generation runs many XFdtd and neutrino
simulations, the GENETIS GA has historically had high computation times. In an
early version of the loop used to evolve a symmetric bicone antenna, the total
run time was approximately 4 hours per generation for 10 individuals, with
AraSim generating 100,000 neutrinos. Computational improvements were made by
splitting up AraSim jobs and running them in parallel; thus, if we were to throw
100,000 neutrinos, we could instead run 10 super-computing jobs of 10,000 each
for one individual. More recent versions of the GA use 50 individuals with
300,000 neutrinos. However, the computational improvements allow a generation to
complete while only taking a factor of 3 longer, despite 15 times the number of
neutrinos. The additional neutrinos reduce the error on the fitness score, which
is related to the number of neutrinos simulated. XFdtd run time was also sped up
by using a virtual desktop interface (VDI) for computation power versus the
original usage of an interactive job. The breakdown of this time can be seen in the table below:

(run-time-table)=

**Previously**

| XF        | AraSim      | Rest of Code | Total     |
| --------- | ----------- | ------------ | --------- |
| 2-3 hours | 11-12 hours | Negligible   | 3-4 hours |

**Presently**

| XF        | AraSim      | Rest of Code | Total     |
| --------- | ----------- | ------------ | --------- |
| 2-3 hours | 11-12 hours | Negligible   | 3-4 hours |

```{admonition} TODO
:class: dropdown
    update this table; Ask Dylan about the speed up.
```

More efforts to further improve upon our run time are in progress. Alex Patton
has contributed notably to efforts to increase the speed of AraSim calculation.
One project aimed at speeding up our loop involves building a neural network to
predict the fitness score from the geometry based on fitness scores already
calculated in previous generations, which would allow for a decrease in
computation time by circumventing the simulation steps for some individuals. The
neural network and initial results are discussed in more detail in
Chapter **3.4.4 (section PAEA/ subsection Future Work)**

```{admonition} TODO
:class: dropdown
    reference 3.4.4
```

```{rubric} reference
```

[^f1]: Rolla, Julie. Dissertation Chapter 3 Section 3.3
    *The Current GENETIS GA*
