# Early GENETIS Investigations [^f1]

Before getting into the optimization of the antennas, GENETIS produced
proof-of-concept studies to understand GAs better and build a foundation of
knowledge. In this section, we will briefly discuss some of the details of our
earlier studies.


## Quarter-Wavelength Dipole Antenna

As our first proof-of-concept, the GENETIS team used a GA to recreate the
length solution for a quarter-wavelength dipole at 3 GHz. Since this is a
problem with a known solution, this helped us explore both the effectiveness of
a GA at finding the solution and the number of generations it takes on average
to arrive at the correct answer. 

````{admonition} more on the early GA
:class: dropdown, tip
The quarter-wavelength dipole study was the first version of our loop software.
It was similar to the current version; however, the fitness evaluation was more
straightforward. This GA began the loop by randomly generating genes for the
initial population (radius and length). Genes for the initial population were
initialized via a uniform distribution, converted to a normal distribution
using the Box Muller method. The Box Muller method can be used to convert
pairs of numbers that are uniformly distributed to numbers that are normally
distributed {cite}`boxmuller`. 
The fitness function involved using XFdtd, an antenna simulation software, to
produce gain patterns for each solution.
The fitness score was simply the measure of peak gain relative to that expected
for a quarter-wavelength dipole at 3 GHz. 
Solutions with a smaller difference in gain pattern to the expected result were
scored as performing better.
The GA modified the generations using mutation, where each individual's genes
were mutated and passed on to the next generation; 
thus, all individuals went through the mutation operator to construct the next
generation, and no selection methods were used.
Each individual's genes were mutated through a Gaussian distribution centered
on the current value, with a standard deviation proportional to the fitness
score.
The GA converged by adjusting the magnitude of the mutations based on the
fitness score.
If an individual was closer to the solution than prior generations, it mutated
with a standard deviation 0.9 times the last deviation.
If the individual were further from the solution, it would mutate using a
standard deviation of the prior deviation divided by 0.9% 
The quarter-wavelength dipole loop can be seen in {numref}`QuartWaveLoop_fig`.
```{figure} img/copy_of_ga_loop_2.png
---
name: QuartWaveLoop_fig
---
The quarter-wavelength dipole project's software loop
```
````


```{figure} img/Quarterwavedipole.png
---
name: QuartWaveresults_fig
---
Results for the evolution of a quarter-wavelength dipole antenna solution
showing the improvement of the average length toward the known solution.
```

As seen in {numref}`QuartWaveresults_fig`, the results of this study show that
with a population of 5 individuals and 13 generations, the design converged to
the expected result very quickly.
The best individuals matched the expected results. The average per generation
doesn't quite reach the solution because the mutation operator is constantly
adjusting each individual.
This result provided an initial proof of concept for the use of a GA for
antenna design and laid an initial foundation for future GENETIS endeavours. 


## Paperclip Antenna Evolution

As a subsequent proof-of-concept investigation, GENETIS member Suren Gourapura 
examined a simple, segmented wire antenna design modeled on the antenna design
evolved for NASA satellite communications in 2006 {cite}`NASA_Paperclip`. The
main goal of this investigation was to further develop the GA with a known type
of antenna design and various types of fitness functions.

The antenna geometry consists of multiple, unit-length segments of wire
connected sequentially. Due to the segmented and bent nature of the resulting
antenna, we call this design a "paperclip antenna." Each segment can point
toward any direction. Thus, the genes that define each individual are the three
rotation angles between $0$ and $2\pi$ about the three Cartesian axes for each
segment. The final individual geometry consists of several randomly rotated
unit vectors attached tip to tail. The Euler angles for each segment are
initially uniformly distributed from $0$ and $2\pi$.

::::{admonition} more on paperclip: the governing fitness function 
:class: tip, dropdown
While several different fitness functions were explored, one, in particular,
directed the evolution of the antenna to arrive at a desired counterclockwise
spiral shape, as illustrated in {numref}`fig_PaperclipResult1`.
This "curl" function was sensitive to changes in the initial parameters and
complex in that all of the evolved rotations had to work together to produce
the final shape, which made it a good test of the algorithm.

The curl fitness function calculates the cross-product between adjacent
vectors, $ \vec{s_i}$ and $\vec{s}_{i+1} $. The fitness score, $F$, defined by
the equation below:
```{math}
F = \sum_{i=1}^{n-1} \vec{s_i}\times\vec{s}_{i+1}
```
Defined this way, the angle between neighboring antenna segments is preferred
to be 90$^\circ$ and oriented counterclockwise in the x-y plane.


```{figure} img/Paperclip_Example.png
---
name: fig_PaperclipResult1
---
Example of a partially evolved paperclip antenna. Note the general
counterclockwise spiral. 
```
::::

```{figure} img/AntennaFitnessTests.png
---
name: fig_PaperclipResult2
width: 60%
---
The best fitness score of 100 paperclip antennas
over 200 generations improved as the antennas evolved to produce a
counterclockwise curl. The GA was performed for various number of
segments {cite}`RollaICRC`
```

The paperclip antennas evolved over 200 generations composed of 100 individuals
using a tournament selection method and a combination of mutation and crossover
operators. 
```{admonition} TODO
:class: dropdown
Tournament selection method internal link or glossary here
```
Antennas with various numbers of segments were tested.
{numref}`fig_PaperclipResult2`
presents the results of this analysis, which shows the highest scoring designs
per generation for different segment lengths. As shown, fewer segments result
in achieving a higher fitness score over fewer generations. Also, a higher
quantity of segments increases the complexity of the antennas, thereby
resulting in a slower approach to the desired solution.
<!-- Future investigations could include using XFdtd to evolve highly directional -->
<!-- paperclip antennas. -->


## GA Performance Test
Suren Gourapura was also the main contributer to the investigation that
examines the performance of the algorithm in the presence of local and global
maximums. Individuals were evolved with two genes called length and radius
(although in this case the names are irrelevant as they just represent two
parameters), where the fitness function is the sum of two displaced Gaussian
distributions of different heights. The genes of the 20 generation-zero
individuals (shown as red dots below) are scatter randomly in the parameter space,
some at the local maximum.

```{figure} img/PAEA_Gen_0.png
---
scale: 40%
---
```
However, as shown in {numref}`fig_PaeaResult`, by the 20{sup}`th` generation,
19 of the 20 individuals were within 2$\sigma$ of the global maximum, despite
some individuals finding the local maximum in earlier generations.
```{figure} img/PAEA_Gen_20.png
---
scale: 40%
name: fig_PaeaResult
---
Example of PAEA algorithm results. The fitness score is shown in
contour plot. Individuals, shown as red dots, began spread over a wide range,
and evolved to group near the global maximum, despite some finding the local
maximum initially {cite}`RollaICRC`.
```
The initial investigation demonstrated the viability of using a GA to solve
complex problems and laid the foundation for the evolution of antennas for UHE
neutrino experiments. 

[^f1]: Rolla, Julie. Dissertation Chapter 3 Section 3.2 *Early GENETIS Investigations*

