# Physical Antenna Evolution Algorithm (PAEA) [^f1]

```{admonition} TODO
:class: dropdown
check the following listing with Julie or Alex
```

(gentree)=
## GENETIS Tree

```{admonition} TODO
:class: dropdown
NEBULUS full name?
```

The OSU GENETIS team has several projects.
These include the Physical Antenna Evolution Algorithm (PAEA),
Antenna Response Evolution Algorithm (AREA),
and **NEBULOUS**. Here we will focus on PAEA, which has three subprojects:

1. `GENETIS_PUEO`:

   Payload for Ultrahigh Energy Observation (PUEO) dual-polarization
   quad-ridged horn antenna evolution

2. `GENETIS_ARA`:

   Askaryan Radio Array (ARA) vertically polarized (VPol) bicone antenna
   evolution. The terms "VPol" and "bicone" are used synonymously.

3. `GENETIS_HPol`:

   Askaryan Radio Array (ARA) horizontally polarized (HPol) quad-slot
   cylindrical antenna evolution

:::{note}
The long-term plan is to combine all of these into one project with a
{term}`Design` switch to allow users to switch between the three.
:::


(a3idx)=
## The "Loop"

Before we begin, note that every GENETIS project has a
{doc}`main script <A3_1>` that is essentially a `while` loop.
Consequently, a GENETIS project is simply referred to by the team as *the loop*.


:::{glossary}
Loop /'lüp/
    A colloquial term that refers to any GENETIS projects.
    > "Ah! The `HPol` loop is broken again. I wonder who wrote this piece of
      garbage"
:::

```{admonition} TODO
:class: dropdown
*   figure needs to be updated
*   figure needs a title
```

```{figure} img/loop_chart.png
---
height: 600px
name: loop_chart_simple
---
A simplified chart of the loop
```



We next introduce the PAEA project using `GENETIS_HPol` as an example.


[^f1]: Rolla, Julie. Dissertation Appendix A. Section A.3
